challenge uh in 20 minutes of
transmitting some uh fairly
unconventional concepts uh and I will do
that and then I can answer questions
about uh the details of how it all works
actually at this website you can
download all of the data sets the
software the controls the yeah you know
every everything is here and then this
is my own sort of uh personal thoughts
about what what this all means so I want
to start here with this this uh classic
piece of art called um Adam names the
animals in the garden of Eden
And this is a world view that even for
people who are not overtly religious,
this is I I think really a worldview
that permeates modern science. And it's
the idea that there are these uh
distinct uh uh categorical um uh
species. They're all different from each
other. We they're they're innumerable.
We know we know what they are. And then
Adam over here is is different. This
this I think we're going to have to blow
up. And I I'll show you the ways in
which we uh we we sort of uh uh dissolve
that. But but the one thing that is
interesting about this this uh depiction
is that uh it was according to the old
biblical story, it was on Adam to name
the animals. God couldn't do it. The
angels couldn't do it. It had to be Adam
that names the animals. Now in these
ancient traditions, naming something
means that you've discovered its true
inner nature. By discovering its name
and giving it the right name, you've
you've you've learned something profound
about it. And that part I think is is
absolutely right about this. So we're
going to we're going to try to get rid
of this anthropocentrism and in fact
brain chauvinism but we are going to
keep a part of this. So so the first
thing is that we we know now ever since
uh evolution and developmental biology
is that this this sort of standard
modern adult human which features so
prominently in stories of uh you know
philosophy 101 all of these things. They
talk about you know humans do this and
and and we do that but but but actually
we know that we are at the um at the
center of several continua. These are
these are continuous slow processes that
got us from a single cell on an
evolutionary scale or a developmental
scale. And whatever you say about this
human as far as the ability to truly
understand the ability to uh be have
moral worth to have responsibilities to
uh have credit and blame and all those
sorts of things. Whatever this magical
agential glow is that modern standard
humans have you you would have to be
able to tell a story of how it got here
slowly and gradually from these
continua. But more importantly, there's
now an additional continuum, which means
that both in biological uh along the
biological axis, but also the
technological axis, you can make slow
and gradual changes and get
progressively further and further from
this archetype. And so again, what we
need in science and philosophy are
stories of transformation, not magical
categories such as the re, you know, a
real human or or proof of humanity
certificates or any of that stuff that
people talk about. we are we are uh
really uh at a at a place where we now
understand none none of that works. So
what I think is really interesting is an
analogy to the electromagnetic spectrum.
So so back in the day before we had a
mature theory of electromagnetism we had
lightning and we had static electricity
and we had light and we had magnets and
various other phenomena. And we thought
those were all different things. And uh
not not only did we think those were all
different things, but we were actually
only directly sensitive to an extremely
narrow uh part of this whole spectrum.
So so what what what what happened? We
we acquired a a good theory of
electromagnetism and that allowed us to
do several things. First of all, it
allowed us to understand that things
that we think of as quite different are
actually the same thing. They're they
are different uh expressions of the same
underlying dynamic. So, so an incredibly
powerful unification. Um, and then it
allowed us to build uh technologies and
to realize that while we are directly
only sensitive here that's just a
contingent fact of our evolutionary
history. In fact, with tools, with the
right equipment, we are now we can
become sensitive to all of this stuff.
And of course, there are many
applications. And so, and so this is
what I'm really interested. I'm really
interested in
uh creating tools, conceptual tools, but
and also practical bench tools because
the implications of the work that I'm
describing here uh have very practical
uh kinds of effects on things like birth
defects, regenerative medicine, cancer
medicine, um bio-engineering and so on.
What we want are tools that allow us to
see across the spectrum of minds. that
is uh to fight the kind of mind
blindness that we have by default
because we are because of our
evolutionary history we're hyperfixated
on three-dimensional space and sort of
medium-sized objects moving in
three-dimensional space as as
intelligent beings. This is what I'm
interested in. I'm interested in uh
developing a framework where we can see
how you get all the way from from quote
unquote passive matter and by the way
I'm no longer sure there is any such
thing and uh and all the way up to human
level and beyond of metacognitive um
kinds of uh uh minds and the these are
the things I want to understand together
as being on the same spectrum not not
just not just mammals and birds but all
kinds of weird organisms including
things that are not even themselves
physical such as patterns within media
And I and I think we need this not only
for biomedical and um bioengineering
applications but because this is really
I I I think a profoundly important step
towards an ethics of a mature species
that has some chance of of survival long
term that meaning us. Okay. So so the
first thing I want to remind us all of
is that we all start life as a single
cell. So it's a little bag of chemicals
that obey physical laws and slowly but
surely there's this gradual process this
amazing magical process of embriionic
development that takes this system from
being the domain of physics and
chemistry to being the domain of
psychology and psychoanalysis or at the
very least behavioral science. Okay. So
we know from developmental biology that
there is no special magical uh point
where uh these things kick in and you
become a mind as opposed to previously
being just physics. And so this is what
we need to understand. We need to
understand the scaling of of this uh of
of mind as it goes from these kinds of
very simple things to something much
more complex. By the way there are some
other uh paths along this journey. So I
won't have time to talk about it today
but if anybody wants to ask me we can
discuss what happens later in terms of a
dissociative identity disorder of your
body which is basically cancer and there
are some other even weirder things that
can happen which which I will describe
in a moment where your cells can have an
entirely new life uh even after the
death of the original uh human donor as
anthrobots and we'll talk about that and
the key to this is that the the key to
understanding this process is that uh
very differently from uh how we build
our computers and robots and we can talk
about as well if somebody wants to ask
what the differences actually are. There
are some really interesting differences.
We we are made of an agential material.
The reason that robots and computers at
least for now don't get cancer is
because they are made of passive parts
and then hopefully the the whole system
has some degree of intelligence but life
isn't like that. Every every uh every
part of our body has agendas. It has
competencies. This is a single cell.
This is known as a lacrimaria. So uh
just one cell, no brain, no nervous
system. This thing has a massive
competency within its own tiny little
cognitive ly cone. It only cares about
things with a very short spatial
temporal horizon. But put together, they
can form much greater things. And of
course, by the way, a lot of a lot of
folks will say that um well, okay, so
you're saying that intelligence goes
down to the single cell level. I mean
that's weird enough but actually it's
well below that because even the
molecular networks inside of cells never
mind the cell itself but the just just
the molecular networks already have six
different kinds of learning they can do
including Pavlovian conditioning and
they have um if you're interested in
things like um causal information theory
and uh Tony's models of uh of uh of fi
and and and integrated information that
some people think is associated with
consciousness those already exist here
at the molecular network level inside of
that cell. The material the the the the
tiniest material already has aspects of
of of learning and and integrated
information and and we're making use of
that by developing applications in drug
conditioning and things like that to
train these pathways. Never mind the
animal, never mind the cells, but the
actual molecular pathways inside. And so
our bodies um have this amazing uh uh
nested intelligence. uh I call it a
multiscale competency architecture where
every level of organization has the
ability to uh to to learn and to solve
problems in different spaces. Um William
James defined intelligence as the
ability to get to the same goal by
different means. That's a very good
definition because it doesn't say it has
to be a brain. It doesn't say what
problem space you're operating with. It
just says you have a a capacity to
navigate that space in a way to solve um
to solve problems. And so the very first
problem that that the collective has to
solve is um to get aligned towards a
specific journey in anatomical space.
And here's what I mean by that. When you
look at an early embryo, so here's an
embryionic blast disc. There might be,
let's say, 100,000 cells. We look at
this and we say, "Oh, there's an
embryo." What what are you counting when
you say there's one embryo? What is
there one of? Because actually there's
100,000 cells and within each one of
those there are organels and and
chemicals and so on. What what are you
actually counting? I I'm going to say
that what you're actually counting is uh
alignment. You are you are counting the
fact that all of these cells under
normal circumstances all of these cells
are committed to the same story to the
same model of where in anatomical space
they are going to go. Anatomical space
is basically the space of all possible
um geometric configurations of the body.
And all of these cells are going to
collaborate on building one particular
structure. Meaning they're going to get
from the point of a single cell to the
configuration of this complicated embryo
because they are they have all bought
into the same story about where they're
going to go. Okay. The what what keeps
these things aligned is a is a self
model that they that they all accept.
And and I said under normal
circumstances because what you can do
and I I used to do this in in duck
embryos as a grad student. You can make
little little scratches in this blaster
and every one of these uh little islands
that's formed until it heals up it
doesn't know about the existence of the
others and so they form their own embryo
and then eventually you get twins and
triplets and and whatever. Um so the
number of individuals in this embryo is
not set by the genetics. It is not
obvious. It is not determined upfront.
they can self-organize by all aligning
towards uh different aspects of that
story and they will all complete the
journey uh in you know on their own. So
so the very first thing that has to
happen is that uh the uh the and and as
I'm going to point out it's it's a
bioelectrical uh mechanism that aligns
them all together. It's a bioelect
electrical uh network that allows them
to remember what pattern they're
supposed to build in the first place.
And that is what makes an an embryo and
an individual rather than millions and
and and billions of cells. Um uh and and
this this this uh by the way uh has has
many implications in in cognitive
science. One of the things that my lab
has uh has driven is this uh really uh
development of this parallel between
cognition and morphagenesis between the
formation of the body and the formation
of the mind. These they're basically the
same the same problem. So when you when
you look at this kind of dissociation uh
there are many things that we learn here
about split brain patients dissociative
identity disorders and so on. And what's
actually happening in this process
that's really interesting is the scaling
of goals. So, so I coined this thing
called the cognitive light cone, which
is basically meant to be the boundary of
the self. It's meant to be the the thing
that distinguishes a self from the
outside world. And what it is is the
scale of the largest goal you can
pursue. So again, not the range of your
senses, not the reach of your aectors,
but the size of the largest goal state
you can remember and you can pursue. So
in sing in little in single cells, they
have tiny little goals. They have short
memories, short um anticipatory power in
the future. And their goals are things
like this, like pH. They're scalers.
They're single numbers about things like
pH within the cell. But when they get
together into networks, that network,
that electrical network allows them to
store grandios. So here's a sal an
axelottle. These amphibians regenerate
most of their body parts including their
limbs, their eyes, their jaws, their
spinal cords, and so on. And if you were
to amputate anywhere along this uh this
this the plane of this limb, these cells
would immediately sense that they've
been taken away from their goal, they
would work really hard to rebuild. And
when they get there, they would stop.
How do they know when to stop? They stop
when um a correct salamander limb has
been completed. They get they stop when
they get back to their homeostatic
state. So no individual cell knows what
a finger is or how many fingers you're
supposed to have, but the collective
absolutely does. And you know that here.
you know that it does a a means ends
analysis here to uh to get back to where
it needs to be once you've deviated it.
But this whole thing is not just about
damage. It's not about um just fixing
this kind of um surgical defect. Um
it'll it also allows you to do these
amazing things. So here's a tadpole that
we made. Uh what you'll notice is uh
there's no eyes where the eyes belong,
but instead so so here are the nostrils,
here's the mouth, here's the brain, the
gut. There's no eyes, but we put an eye
on its tail. And it's a whole story I
could tell you about how how we do it.
But but what happens with this with this
eye is that it makes an optic nerve.
That optic nerve does not go to the
brain. It synapses on the spinal cord or
sometimes on the gut, sometimes nowhere
at all. And the most amazing thing about
it is that these animals can see. And we
know because we built this device that
trains them for visual um learning tasks
and they they can see perfectly well. So
this is this is shocking. Why does it
not take additional rounds of mutation
and selection to radically change this
animal's sensory motor architecture and
make things work? Does you don't need
it. It works out of the box. And it
works out of the box because that
process where all of the cells every
single time you can you can call it
beginner's mind where every single time
they have to solve the problem of what
what what are we and what are we going
to build and where are we going to go
and um it is it is never obvious to them
or assumed that they are what they are.
Okay. Okay, the story that the genetics
tells you what you're going to be is is
is is not the right story at all. That
instead what the genetics builds is a
problem-solving agent that is very
creative in interpreting its environment
and interpreting the genetics that have
been passed down to it. And so that's
why and I could I could do hours on on
just examples of uh creative problem
solving where where you don't need
additional rounds of mutation because
the material never thought it was going
to be a perfect tadpole in the first
place, right? it it it it's able to
adapt to all kinds of novel
manipulations. So I kept mentioning this
word bio electricity and so what what
we've developed um is uh are methods to
read and write the mind of the body the
way that neuroscientists have done in
the brain. And so here you're seeing um
voltage sensitive fluorescent dyes
tracking the the color corresponds to
voltage and and what you're seeing is a
time lapse. Here are some cells. This is
a frog embryo. What you're seeing is all
the electrical communications that allow
this thing to be more than the sum of
its parts. The bioelectricity is the
cognitive glue that binds your neurons
together into not just a pile of
neurons, but into you. And the
bioelectricity is also the cognitive
glue that binds individual cells into a
collective that can remember what a
tadpole is supposed to look like. And we
have lots of lots of tools for for for
doing simulations that we've created. uh
we're trying to merge those with all
kinds of connectionist ideas about um
attractors in in in in memory networks
that can do pattern completion and that
have uh have the ability to to navigate
the space and so on. So um one one way
that we know that this bioelectric uh
pattern is actually the memory of this
collective intelligence. So let's get
back to the the beginning of the talk.
What I was pointing out is that there
are some really weird intelligences out
there that we are not uh familiar with.
And so we use morphagenesis as one
example. So groups of cells are an
unconventional collective intelligence
that navigates a really strange space
that we cannot visualize. It's a
highdimensional anatomical morph space.
And our goal is to learn to communicate
with that intelligence to predict its
behavior and to communicate with it and
to ask it to do different things in
biomedical contexts. And so in order to
do that we've developed this biological
interface. So now we can directly read
now decoding them is a whole other
matter but we can directly read the
memory states uh of this intelligence
and we could try to rewrite new give it
new ideas. Well what kind of idea could
you give it? Well one thing you might
say is that you know a proper tadpole
should really have an eye on its tail on
its on its gut in this case. And so the
way you would do that is by injecting
RNA that encodes a particular channel
ion channel protein in this case a
potassium channel. And uh what you would
do is establish a little voltage state
here that says to the surrounding cells
you should build an eye. Okay. How did
we know? 10 years of of work trying to
understand how the cells interpret these
voltage gradients. So so when you do
that you make an eye. These eyes have
all the right you know lens retina optic
nerve. They have all the right things.
Um, and by the way, they can do another
neat trick, which is that if you only
inject a few of them. So, here are the
blue ones are the ones we injected. They
will actually recruit their neighbors to
make this lovely uh lens that's sitting
out in the in the tail of a tadpole
somewhere. We didn't have to touch these
cells. All we said is there you guys
should make an eye. And they they take
it from there and they say, "Well,
there's not enough of us. Let's let's
get our friends to help." And they they
convince. And it's really a process of
of trying to basically um infect them
with a better world model of what they
should be doing. And there's a there's
actually a debate that goes on and the
cells resist. But but when they win, you
get this you get this beautiful eye. And
of course, there are many other
collective intelligences that scale to
problem size on their own. Um just to
show you that you can this is a kind of
a a useful application where we're
looking for limb regeneration. Frogs
unlike that axelottle do not regenerate
their limbs as neither do we. And so 45
days later after losing a leg um there
is no uh regeneration normally. But if
we give the cells an early signal, so
it's a wearable bioreactor with some ion
channel payload, it uh immediately tells
the cells to get going. 45 days later,
you've got some toes, you've got a
toenail, eventually a touch sensitive
and functional leg. The most important
thing here is that like with any good
cognitive system, you do not micromanage
the molecules. When I'm talking to you
right now, I'm not worried about
reaching into your brain and having to
arrange all the synapses so that you
remember what I've said. I'm giving you
information on a very thin
communications channel and I'm trusting
you as a high-end cognitive system to do
all the biochemistry downstream that's
required for you to react to what I'm
saying. The same thing is true here.
This this signal was present for 24
hours and after that we've shown a year
and a half of leg growth during which
time we don't touch it at all. The goal
is not to micromanage it. It is not to
tell the cells what to do. It is not to
um 3D print scaffolds for stem cells.
None none of that. The goal is to
convince it on day one that this is the
path you should go. The the the leg
building path is the right one, not the
scarring path. And there you go. Okay.
So, in the last two minutes, um what I
want to show you is this. So, so far
what I've been telling you is that we
can uh we can convince living tissue to
uh repair or remake or reposition normal
organs that they already make. And I
want to show you the the something even
further from this, the remarkable
plasticity of life. So, uh, if I show
you, uh, this this video and I ask you
what, uh, what you think this is, a
reasonable guess would be that it's a,
um, primitive organism that we got from
a pond somewhere. And, uh, and if I ask
you what the genome would be, you would
guess that it has like one of these
ancient genomes with these tiny little
tiny little creatures. Uh, I can tell
you that this the genome here is 100%
homo sapiens. This is perfectly normal
human adult human cells. They have not
been manipulated with any synthetic
biology circuits. There are no scaffolds
here. There are no um trans genes.
There's no genomic editing. What this is
is taking cells from an adult human
patient, tracheal epithelial cells
actually from their airway and giving
them a chance to have another lease on
life to reboot their multisellularity.
The original patient uh may or may not
be alive, but the cells uh in a in an um
in a slightly different environment, not
not that different actually, but but
liberated from the rest of the body
could have this completely novel novel
life. Okay? And uh you you would not
know that by looking at it, but actually
um this is this because because this
doesn't look like any stage of human
development. Okay? This is completely
novel. They have novel capabilities. Uh
half of their genome is expressed
differently. So each one of these red
dots is a gene that it expresses
differently than it would have if it had
stayed in your airway. Okay? So about
half the genome, 9,000 genes are
completely altered because the genetics
doesn't drive what you are. The genetics
is a a resource book that that the
active systems dip into as affordances.
And one of the cool things they can do
is if you if you plate a bunch of human
neurons and you put a big scar a big
wound through them here, right? this
this big wound, the bots will gather
together into what we call a superbot
cluster. And what they do is start um
knitting the two sides together. And
here you can see when you take it off,
you can see what happened. Who who would
have thought that your tracheal cells
that sit there quietly for long periods
of time just dealing with mucus and
whatnot have the ability to self
assemble into a novel uh protoorganism
with its own life with its own gene
expression with its own set of behaviors
uh and and and these kind of
capabilities that we're only now
beginning to scratch the surface of
because this is going to be personalized
in the body therapeutics. Right? These
biobots made of your own cells don't
need immune suppression. you can put
them back in the body and and uh we're
now working up uh the full list of what
they can actually repair. So um so just
to just to end uh because life is a
problem-solving uh process from the
beginning almost any combination of
evolved material, engineered material
and software is some kind of viable
agent. Life is incredibly interoperable.
So hybr cyborgs and chimeas of every
kind all make use of these ingressing uh
patterns which is a whole other thing we
could talk about um uh from from
mathematics and computation that create
viable beings. Everything that Darwin
saw when he said endless forms most
beautiful meaning natural life is a tiny
little uh blip here on this enormous
space of beings with whom we are going
to share our world. Many of these things
already exist. Many more are are
forthcoming. And what we need is to so
so here's a word that actually GPT4 came
up with this word for me synth biosis.
This idea that we are going to have to
get better at recognizing other minds
and ethically relating to them so that
we can all have a more positive
embodiment. And uh this is this is what
I think the future the Garden of Eden is
going to really look like. It's going to
be very weird. Um and it is on us
actually uh to really understand what
we're dealing with. Xenobots and
anthrobots and augmented humans and
chimeas of all kinds. Uh we are really
going to have to raise our game. Uh
because uh the things that used to work,
what do you look like and where and how
did you get here? Meaning factory versus
versus a trial and error of evolution.
Those categories are not going to be any
good anymore. So um I'm going to skip
all this. We don't have time. Uh and
just and just point out that uh there's
some amazing people that need to get the
credit for all the things that um I
showed you today. So these are my
postocs and my grad students. Uh we have
lots of remarkable collaborators uh uh
our funders disclosures. So these are
three spin-off companies from our work
that um support our our our research
right now. And uh all the biggest thanks
go to the model systems because they do
all the heavy lifting and teaching us
about this stuff. So um I will stop here
and thank you for listening.